---
layout: posts
title: "Garbage Collection in Minim"
date: 2021-07-14
last_modified: 2021-07-14
categories: blog
---

Currently, one of the key issues in Minim is the lack of garbage collection.
To handle precise memory management, I implemented a weird owner-and-reference
  system that has been quite tiresome to keep track of.
To solve this, I am developing a garbage collector for the Minim, and I recently
  [merged](https://github.com/bksaiki/Minim/pull/5)
  a working version into the project for testing.
The garbage collector greatly simplifies the code base by getting rid
  of calls to `free()` and removes most instances of copying objects.
In terms of performance, Minim is now much slower, anywhere between 2x and 4x.
Much of this slow down is beacuse allocated objects are no
  longer freed precisely, and there is additional overhead
  from tracking allocations.

The Minim GC is a generational, conservative, mark-and-sweep garbage
  collector implemented in C based on the
  [Tiny Garbage Collector](https://github.com/orangeduck/tgc),
  a minimal garbage collector.
It expands on the TGC by separating allocations into two generations,
  young and old.
The younger generation is marked and swept every cycle, by default
  every time new allocations total 8 MB in size.
Any surviving allocations are moved to the older generation.
The older generation is marked and swept every 15 cycles.

The stack is swept from the "bottom" of the stack, provided during
  initialization, to a local address within the sweeping function.
A neat trick to always forcing pointer addresses on the stack no matter
  the optimization level is to use the `setjmp(jmp_buf env)` function
  from `setjmp.h` which saves the values of registers to set a jump point.
It makes sense that this function exists, but I honestly didn't realize
  it could be used for this mechanism.

Like the TGC, the Minim GC provides a way to associate a destructor with
  an allocated block in case memory allocated outside of the garbage
  collector needs to be freed upon sweeping.
However, it also provides a way to associate a "marking" function with each
  memory block.
These functions precisely mark internal pointers so that the garbage collector
  doesn't naively mark every possible pointer within the memory block.
These functions can cause issues if a developer changes a struct but not its
  respective marking function; I ran into this issue on a few occasions
  when switching Minim to use the garbage collector.
In addition, atomic allocation macros are provided to allocate data not containing
  any pointers.

Although naive, the Minim GC has made working with the Minim code base much easier
  since I don't have to spend hours dealing with segmentation faults.
If I had to make Minim all over again, I definitely would have stuck with using a
  garbage collector from the beginning.
It eliminates my owner-and-reference system that was causing quite
  a headache when dealing with copies of objects.
Now the same object can be in a list, hash table, and vector, all at the same time,
  since immutability is respected.

As for perfomance issues, I managed to claw back almost all of the slow down by
  adding tail call optimization which ensures the amount of allocated
  memory and the size of the stack remains quite small.
This garbage collector along with tail call optimization, quasiquoting, and
  syntax macros will be in the next release, and is currently in the main branch.
